[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to another edition
of "Beyond Belief."
Mark Stavish is our guest,
internationally best-selling
author of close to 30 books now
on spirituality and self-help.
He is also the
founder and Director
of the Studies for the
Institute for Hermetic Studies.
Welcome to the program, Mark.
>>MARK STAVISH:
George, thank you.
It's great to be here.
>>NOORY: Hermetic studies.
What are hermetic studies?
>>STAVISH: It's simply
traditional, Western, esoteric
or spiritual studies.
Most people are familiar with it
in terms of not only meditation
and symbolism, but also,
to some degree, astrology,
or what they might have heard
in terms of alchemy or Qabala.
>>NOORY: And it's just all
encompassed under that.
>>STAVISH: It's just
an umbrella term that
covers all of those studies.
And it generally
relates to those things
which mostly come from Egypt--
Hermes, Egyptian god Hermes--
and the Middle East in
general, but also into Europe,
through the Middle Ages and
the Renaissance to the present.
>>NOORY: What led you
in that direction?
>>STAVISH: I've
always been around it.
My family, or part of my family,
I should say, came from an area
in Eastern Europe, more
was at that time Germany,
around the turn of the
century, early 1900s.
And that area was very
rich in esoteric practices.
So my great
grandfather, and folks
before him, and my great
uncle, and to some degree,
my grandmother, always had some
interest in this and practice.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Now you also got
involved in your interest
in lucid dreaming.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: Lucid
dreaming, of course,
means a dream that you know
you're in a dream, right?
Let's talk about that.
>>STAVISH: Well, often, when we
dream, we simply fall asleep,
we have a dream, and
we believe it's real,
and we act accordingly.
We're getting chased
by a giant elephant,
and we're in a terror,
and we wake up, and--
[GASPING]
Oh, wait, it wasn't real.
>>NOORY: Thank God.
>>STAVISH: Thank
God it wasn't real.
That's it.
And then as we experience
greater levels of lucidity
in our own mind, in our
own thinking process,
in our own experience
of life, that
moves forward not just
in a day-to-day state,
but into our dream state.
And then we have those
moments of lucidity,
where our body is completely
at rest and asleep,
but we're awake in our own mind.
Wait.
This is how my mind
functions, and it's
producing these dreams
and these scenarios for us
that we know their dreams, but
they have meaning and value.
They're a teaching
mechanism of sorts.
>>NOORY: You can actually change
the outcome of a lucid dream
because you know you're one.
>>STAVISH: That's correct.
Now it takes effort.
It doesn't always--
>>NOORY: It's practice.
>>STAVISH: It doesn't
always happen easily.
I have many humorous stories
from people who thought,
oh, well, this is a dream,
so I can do anything.
And it kind of sort of works.
Probably the funniest
one for myself
is I was having this
fantastic lucid dream.
And of course, you want to
check the boundaries of it.
So you do things
that aren't natural,
things you wouldn't
do in normal life--
I want to make that clear.
>>NOORY: Just to see
if it's a dream, right?
>>STAVISH: That's to
see if it's a dream.
So I said, well,
if this is a dream,
and it is, then this
shouldn't hurt, right?
And I do this wonderful thing
to my hand, and I wake up,
and my hand is in terrible pain.
So there, we have
an illustration
of the mind-body connection too.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>STAVISH: OK?
That what happens in
our mind has an effect
somehow on our physiology.
>>NOORY: Why do we have
so many different kinds
of dreams, Mark?
We have lucid dreaming.
We have precognitive dreams.
We have self-healing dreams.
We have dreams of
our departed ones.
Why do we have so
many different kinds?
We have nightmares.
>>STAVISH: All of these are a
reflection of our level of--
we'll call it mental integration
or spiritual awakening.
And we go through daily
life often very confused.
We don't recognize it as
such, but it's confused.
So our dreams reflect that.
And for people who undertake,
or are beginning to undertake,
or are being pushed in a
direction of a spiritual path,
that's when you see the
dream life often changes.
I met a fellow here
yesterday, in Boulder,
who said that he was an
atheist, a young guy.
And he had this
experience, and it was just
so powerful and overwhelming
that he just packed everything
up, moved out here to Boulder.
>>NOORY: And now
he's a believer.
>>STAVISH: Yeah.
And those breakthroughs,
those kind of breakthroughs
can happen to people.
They don't always, but they can.
Often, it's more subtle.
>>NOORY: What creates
the lucid dream?
>>STAVISH: That's a tough one.
Usually, when we
look at the process,
it's just a greater level
of mental self-awareness.
What we would call it
is a greater integration
of enlightenment or inner
illumination, inner awareness.
>>NOORY: All the time.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
And of course, that comes
and goes with people.
We're trying to be
more integrated,
and sometimes, we're really good
at it, sometimes, we're not.
But as we practice,
and we meditate,
or we undertake
a spiritual path,
and there's greater
levels of relaxation--
I think that might be the
operative word, is relaxation.
There's a mental
relaxation where
we're willing to engage all
those things in our own mind
so that the nightmares aren't
really frightening anymore.
The nightmares are a challenge.
They're more like a horror
movie that we watch on TV.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>STAVISH: Well, many people
do watch horror movies on TV,
and you see they get frightened.
>>NOORY: They don't
want to go to bed.
>>STAVISH: They don't
This is that same thing,
except it's in your own mind,
and you're working out
some kind of trauma,
or fear, or anxiety,
or creative process.
>>NOORY: Lucid dreaming,
when it happens, is
kind of enlightening, isn't it?
You have that kind of euphoric
feeling that you're in a dream,
and you know you're dreaming.
>>STAVISH: Yes, and
that's the beauty of it.
It's unequivocal.
You know it because it's a
direct personal experience
of the clarity, to some
degree, of your own mind.
And when we look at the
history of great scientific
breakthroughs, when you
look at a lot of folks,
they talk about how the
breakthrough came through
in a dream.
When you look at the great
manuscripts of spirituality--
perfect example is
"The Chemical Wedding
of Christian Rosenkreutz."
In the opening chapter, our
hero, Christian Rosenkreutz,
falls asleep and has a dream
in which an angel comes to him
and takes him on this journey.
>>NOORY: And maybe
that happened.
>>STAVISH: Yeah.
And again, and again,
and again, we see that.
So whether the angel was
a actual other entity,
or whether it's their own
higher self, doesn't matter.
What matters is that a whole
revelation or unfolding is
taking place with that person.
>>NOORY: Mark,
based on the kinds
of dreams I've been having,
whether they're lucid dreaming
or just dreams in general,
they seem to be, at least
in terms of our
time, to be short.
I mean, like 15 or 20 seconds.
That's what I remember
when I wake up.
Why are they so short?
They got to be longer than that.
>>STAVISH: I think it has to do
with how we process information
personally.
That when you look at the
average person's concentration
span, it's very short.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: And then you look
at your own concentration span,
and it's probably better,
but it's relatively short.
So a part of our
mind knows, we've
got to deliver the message, and
it's got to be memorable now.
So it's like holding
up a giant stop sign.
Not telling you why to stop.
It's just big, and red, and says
"stop," and you hit the brakes.
That's probably what is
going on within our own mind.
It is condensing everything
down to the most efficient,
the most efficient use
of time and communication
in information that we can get.
>>NOORY: It's a powerful tool.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: It really is.
I've had an opportunity
to interview
a lot of remote viewers on the
radio show and "Beyond Belief,"
one, of course, was
Julia Mossbridge, who
is a remote viewer and a
precognition researcher.
Let's look.
>>JULIA MOSSBRIDGE:
I've now realized,
through practicing
remote viewing,
that it's a lot like meditation.
>>NOORY: I was just going
to ask you about meditation.
I think if you get into
that meditative state,
you have a better
ability to do what we've
been talking about
with precognition
and remote viewing, don't you?
>>MOSSBRIDGE: Yeah.
In fact, there's a
period called cool down
before you start your remote
viewing where you basically
meditate.
And it definitely seems to help.
But the remote viewing
itself feels like meditation
because you're really
watching your mind.
It's almost as if there's a
movie screen inside of you.
At least this is my experience.
And you see, and hear, and
taste, and touch things.
But if you're not observing,
if you're not observing,
you can't report correctly.
>>NOORY: Do you agree?
It's meditation too?
>>STAVISH: 100%.
>>NOORY: You do?
>>STAVISH: And I think what
we have to look at is--
what's really going on here
is, too often, in the West,
whether it's been
with remote viewing,
or different schools of occult
thought or esoteric thought,
we look at things
very discreetly.
And there's a connection, a
continuum, between meditation,
understanding our own mind,
quality of our dreams,
our dream state,
lucid dreaming, what
we call out-of-body
experiences, and then
ultimately, the quality
of afterlife survival.
It is a continuum.
It is not discrete experiences.
And that's what I wrote
about in "Between the Gates,"
is to explore that
and explain that.
And later on, after
I'd written the book,
I came across writings within
Tibetan Buddhism, particularly
Vajrayana and their dream
yogas, as they call it,
and that's what was said
there, that it's a continuum.
So what she stated here
about the idea of the screen,
that's not simply a metaphor.
That is an actual experience.
And you have that experience as
if you were looking at a screen
and watching things happen.
It's very real that way.
And you see that
in some symbolism.
And some Taoist
priests, on their hats,
they have a little white
square on their forehead.
And that's symbolic of
that notion of you're
watching the screen
of the psychic mind
or whatever is happening
unfold before you.
>>NOORY: Mark, can you train
yourself to have a lucid dream?
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: You can?
Meditation?
How do you do that?
>>STAVISH: Meditation is the
best thing because it comes
down to being able to relax.
Just relax, as she
said, and observe.
So the more you can relax
and observe, right here,
as we're sitting, or as
you can relax and observe
what's going on in your
own mind as you sit here,
you just transfer
that right over.
Slowly, but it transfers
over, piece by piece,
into your dream state.
>>NOORY: Do you have to think
about the dream or something
before you go to bed?
>>STAVISH: It's very
important that you cultivate
the strong desire, the
intention, that tonight, I
will dream, I will become
aware that I am dreaming,
and I will take
control of my dreams,
and I will remember
them upon awakening.
It's very important
that you undertake
that four-step process.
And you can say it
exactly as I just did.
You can just repeat it to
yourself as an affirmation over
and over again.
Because remember, you're
training your mind
to recognize itself,
and affirmations
are a powerful tool for them.
>>NOORY: It is an
amazing tool, isn't it?
>>STAVISH: Oh, it's
just fantastic.
Look, people don't have
lucid dreams every night.
It would be nice if we did.
It'd be nice if we had
these fantastic out-of-body
experiences every night.
We often don't.
But we have them, and
we can cultivate them,
and we can apply them to make
our lives more productive, more
joyous, and just
better for everyone.
>>NOORY: Why are some dreams
rememberable and others are
not?
There are many nights I don't
remember my dreams at all.
>>STAVISH: I think
it just has to do
with importance a lot of our
dreams are just processing.
I'm sure you've been
times in your life
when you've gone
through the day,
talking to yourself
over something.
Something happened,
and it's frustrating,
you find yourself
even talking out loud.
You say, I don't
want to go crazy.
I got to stop this.
So just as we ruminate
as we're awake,
we ruminate as we're asleep.
And it's kind of
a purging process,
and it doesn't really matter.
It's like deleting files.
>>NOORY: Yeah
>>STAVISH: Whereas
the new file, that's
the one we got to remember.
The new process, the
new understanding,
the new way of
expressing ourselves,
that has an emotional
impact on us,
and that's why we remember it.
>>NOORY: I saw a guy talking
to himself a couple weeks ago,
and I thought he was absolutely
nuts, until I realized
he had a little
earpiece in, and he had
his cell phone in his pocket.
That's happening
a lot these days.
>>STAVISH: And it's
funny, we laugh about it,
but that kind of
distraction that we often
have in day-to-day life,
that constant distraction
is antithetical to
spiritual awakening.
And we have to learn
to disengage, and learn
to relax, and go within,
and observe our own mind,
and then all these
skills happen.
Now many of these skills
will happen spontaneously
and naturally, whether
it's remote viewing,
astral projection,
or lucid dreaming.
>>NOORY: What creates the
lucid dreaming as opposed
to just a regular dream?
And when I have
regular dreams, Mark--
maybe you can
explain this for me.
I'm learning just
talking to you.
I feel as if I never see myself.
I don't see my hands.
I feel like I'm looking in a
window at whatever's happening.
That's how my dreams are.
Lucid dreaming is
a little different.
I feel a little
bit more involved,
but I still don't see
George in the dream.
Why is that?
>>STAVISH: I think
that because when
we're having a regular
dream, the stimulation
to our psyche that's
causing the dream
is coming mostly from
the external world,
from day-to-day experience.
So it moves in, our
senses experience it,
our brain somehow processes
it, and that information
gets stored away, we'll
say, in the subconscious.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>STAVISH: OK.
And then the
subconscious at night
tries to sort this out
and boom-- crazy dream.
When we're having
a lucid dream, it's
coming from mostly the
opposite direction.
It's coming from
what we would think
of as our higher self, our
inner self, our divine self.
And it's moving from that
way into the subconscious,
creating an experience,
an environment
that we will remember.
And then it moves forward
into the waking state where
we go, oh, OK, and we
can have some sense of it
and process it.
>>NOORY: Give us some techniques
to create more lucid dreaming.
>>STAVISH: Best
one, of course, is
undertake a spiritual practice
of relaxation and meditation,
even if it's just for a few
minutes a day, several times
a day.
>>NOORY: Does it have to
be before you go to bed?
>>STAVISH: Well, when you're
going to sleep, just relax.
And as I said earlier,
focus on this idea
that, tonight, I will dream,
I will recognize that I'm
dreaming, I will remember my
dreams upon awakening-- oh, I
will recognize I'm dreaming,
I'll take control of my dreams,
I will remember
them upon awakening.
And with that, you can
add in visualizations.
Now some traditional
visualizations
have to do with psychic
centers, so we can add those in.
The easiest one is,
of course, the heart.
They say meditate on
the heart, and visualize
a brilliant,
glowing light there,
as if you are falling asleep in
the lap of a spiritual teacher
or a person that you admire.
Again, trust in relaxation.
When you visualize
this, though--
and this is critical
for people--
you want to visualize this
brilliant, brilliant light so
bright that it's as if it fills
the room you're sleeping in.
I've noticed when I've spoken
to people, if they just
do the affirmations and
focus on their heart,
they'll probably
have the experience.
But if they visualize
the light as this giant
sphere surrounding
their room even--
bigger, brighter the better--
that will help trigger it.
And when I've asked people,
and we've talked about it,
it has to do with the
very words we use--
enlightenment,
illumination, lucidity.
It's the act of
visualizing clarity
that helps to stimulate the
clarity in our own mind.
And if you just practice
that, and same thing
with your language.
The language is affirmative,
it's definitive,
and yet, it's relaxed.
>>NOORY: And here are
some more techniques
for getting into lucid dreaming.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
The first thing
is one has to realize
they're dreaming.
>> Mm-hmm.
>>MEREDITH: And let's talk
about a couple techniques
you give people,
because they have
some homework in
your waking hours
in order to get to this place.
>> It does.
And I think, like you
said, find that awareness.
And it is a bit
of a tricky game,
especially if you've
never had a lucid dream,
and you're trying to essentially
become aware of something
where you're not actually
currently aware while you're
in it.
So all the techniques really
stem from manipulating our mind
or focusing our mind
to detect the dream
state without us being
consciously aware of it yet.
And as soon as we can
detect it, well then,
you're instantly-- now
you're in a lucid dream.
>>MEREDITH: So give
some of the techniques
that you would do
during the day,
for example, once you've
committed to finding out
that you're in the dream
state and in the process
of lucid dreaming.
>> So one of the
great techniques--
and it's a bit of homework,
but it's not going to eat
into your day-- is just a
couple times throughout the day,
asking yourself, am I dreaming?
And just saying, am I dreaming?
Oh, no, I'm not dreaming because
I'm driving to work right now.
But saying, am I dreaming?
And taking a brief moment
to actually think about it.
Like, wait a second, is there
any weird moments going on?
Is there a pink elephant
walking across the street?
That might be a sign that
you're either at the circus
or that you're dreaming.
But saying that.
And you can do it
during certain moments,
like every time you walk
through your front door,
ask a question-- am I dreaming?
Or every time you
get in your car--
am I dreaming?
>>MEREDITH: It's starting to
set the pattern of the question
so that it can translate
into dream time.
>> Exactly.
And then all this leads
up to a moment where
you're in the dream, and
your body, and your mind that
has become accustomed
to asking that question,
asks the question,
am I dreaming?
And in the dream,
probably at first,
you'll be like, oh,
no, I'm not dreaming.
And then, wait a second,
I just flew to this party.
I'm in a dream.
And then that's the
moment where you've
switched from not being
lucid to becoming lucid.
>>NOORY: That was
our Regina Meredith
talking to a dream expert.
What do you think of
what he had to say?
>>STAVISH: Well, it's
very traditional.
And it's very important, he
pointed out several things,
one is the notion of across
the day, asking, am I dreaming?
And that makes us aware of
the fact that we do dream.
Also, you see that within
Tibetan Buddhism, the Vajrayana
practices, the notion
of looking at the world
we live in right now as a dream,
that everything is a dream,
everything is a projection of
our own mind on some level.
And it doesn't
mean it's not real.
It just means that our
understanding of it
comes from within our own mind.
The other statement
he said about
"as you're walking
through doors,"
this has to do with what's
known as liminality.
And whenever you pass
through a gateway,
the notion is that you're moving
from one domain to another.
And I believe that one of the
practitioners or researchers
in a remote viewing
used a method
like that to help stimulate
these remote viewing processes.
But that's why we
often dream in terms
of, when you think of the
classical symbolism, we
talk of the gateway, or
the portal of initiation,
the doorway.
Knock, and it shall
be open to you.
That's what's happening there.
So we get to use this physical
world and our experiences in it
as a mechanism of triggering
inner experiences.
And that's when we're starting
to move into, realistically,
a lot of really esoteric
practices within either Tibetan
Vajrayana, or Indian Tantra,
or Qabala, or alchemy.
>>NOORY: There are a
lot of people, Mark,
who just simply can't sleep.
They can't sleep.
So they take prescription
pills to sleep.
Does that affect the
dream state at all?
>>STAVISH: Well, it has to.
>>NOORY: You would think so.
>>STAVISH: Well,
simply because we're
complex beings in terms
of our, what we call,
body, speech, and mind, or
thought, word, and deed.
That interrelationship
of mind and body,
and the chemistry that unites
the two on different levels,
is a really subtle one.
And the medication they
take to sleep, what does it
do to their dream state?
I'm sure there's some
research on that.
>>NOORY: It either enhances
it or dulls it, I would guess.
>>STAVISH: It's got to do
something, one or the other,
but it can't be the same.
That's just my guess.
>>NOORY: What about the
vitamins and supplements?
Is there anything out there
for the mind and your dreams?
>>STAVISH: There is.
I am not familiar with that,
but I have seen some articles
within the last two years
and some books on it that do
suggest that certain supplements
will assist in dreaming state.
You see within
traditional herbalism
that there's a variety of
herbs that people will often
take to enhance dreaming.
And of course,
that's something that
should be done very carefully
because you want to make sure
that the herb is, well,
that it's not going to have
a negative effect on you.
But people can research
that on their own.
>>NOORY: Lucid dreaming and
out-of-body experiences.
Of course, with an
out-of-body experience,
you're astrally
traveling throughout.
Are there similarities?
>>STAVISH: Definitely.
>>NOORY: Are there differences?
>>STAVISH: There
is a difference.
And when we look at traditional
studies, again, whether it's in
"Between the Gates"
and how this relates
to Western esoteric practices,
or, say, Tibetan Vajrayana,
or even the Bon practices,
or even the Taoist practices
on dreaming, there is
a clear distinction
that lucid dreaming is critical.
It is a critical state in
each of our spiritual paths
and unfoldment.
>>NOORY: Wow.
That's powerful.
>>STAVISH: Because it is
the foundation that we then
use to have controlled
interactions with our own mind
and then controlled,
what we would
call, out-of-body experiences.
>>NOORY: These out-of-body
experiences, of course,
I've had one when I was 11.
I've not, Mark, been
able to duplicate it.
Thank God I can do lucid
dreaming a little better
than I can do remote viewing.
But again, it all has
to do with meditation,
and practice, and
training, doesn't it?
>>STAVISH: That's it.
And look, lucid dreaming
is one of those things.
You're going to go
to sleep anyhow.
>>NOORY: You will.
And wake up.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, I hope,
and wake up, right.
So it really is among
the easiest practices
to integrate into
your spiritual path.
You're going to fall
asleep, so just take
a few minutes, two,
three, four minutes.
It's not that much.
>>NOORY: Do you think
dying is like being
in a continuous dream?
>>STAVISH: The research
and the tradition
suggests that there is
a strong relationship
between the dreaming
and what goes on
in the death process, the
things of our own mind
unfold and occur before us,
and that we process them
to some degree before moving on
to a greater level of clarity,
hopefully.
>>NOORY: I'm beginning to think
more and more that if there are
near-death experiences, and
if the afterlife exists--
and I believe it does--
that it is probably
like a dream.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: It's got that
kind of flow to it.
And I don't know if it's a dream
or a lucid dream when you die.
>>STAVISH: I believe
that it's a lucid dream,
and I say that because you're
aware that the process is
unfolding, we'll assume.
>>NOORY: Do you think you
know you're dead when you die?
>>STAVISH: There's
a suggestion when
you look at the literature.
It's hard because anything
I say definitively,
someone will come back and
say, well, how do you know?
Have you talked to
anybody who's dead?
And that's debatable.
There's always a room for
argument or dismissiveness.
But if we just look at the
literature, whether it's
traditional literature, or
from the Society for Psychical
Research in the 120 or
30 years of research
they've done on psychic research
and afterlife encounters,
there is reason to believe that
at some point, whether it's
immediately or a few what we
think of as days afterwards,
people recognize
that they're dead.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Dr. Bruce Goldberg,
hypnotherapist,
has a lot to say
about dreams and OBEs.
>>BRUCE GOLDBERG: Here's
an example of dreams.
Remember I told you dreams
are out-of-body experiences.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>GOLDBERG: Let me give you a
dream example that you've had
and everybody out there
in TV land has had--
dreams of flying.
Everybody's had
>>NOORY: Oh,
everybody's had that.
Sure.
>>GOLDBERG: Now there's
a second dream too.
We'll talk about
that in a moment.
Dreams of flying
is when your soul
leaves the body
from the Earth plane
and goes up into
the astral plane.
>>NOORY: In your dream state?
Or is it really happening?
>>GOLDBERG: No, it's
really happening.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>GOLDBERG: When
you're dreaming,
your soul is out of the body.
Now you say, what about being
possessed or a psychic attack?
No, you leave a
clone of yourself,
like an alias on a computer, so
your body is always protected.
Now there's another
dream that people have
when they feel like they're
falling into an abyss.
They never splat, but
they feel like they're
falling into a deep crevice.
>>NOORY: Right.
And you think if
you hit, you die.
>>GOLDBERG: Right,
but you don't.
>>NOORY: We've
always thought that.
>>GOLDBERG: And you
can hear a pin drop.
You hear this, maybe, like a--
shh-- whooshing sound, or
like the roar of the sea
kind of thing, which is
characteristic of the astral
plane, but you don't splat.
That's when your soul is
returning from the astral plane
to the Earth plane.
So those are remnants,
conscious remnants,
of out-of-body experiences.
>>NOORY: And sometimes, that's
a jarring effect for us,
when you feel that.
>>GOLDBERG: Yes.
Think of it this way.
When you wake up in the
morning, do you ever
notice, for a few seconds, you
don't know what time it is?
Is it 7:00 AM, or is it 7:00 PM?
What planet am I on?
You get disoriented.
>>NOORY: Where am I?
>>GOLDBERG: Just
for a few seconds.
And the reason why is
because your astral body
has slammed back into
the physical body,
and it's very disruptive,
just for a second or two.
>>NOORY: And the slamming
effect wakes you up.
>>GOLDBERG: Yes,
well, that's true.
Yes.
Whether you have an
alarm clock or not,
it's your automatic alarm clock.
>>NOORY: If you had
your preference,
would you prefer an out-of-body
experience or a lucid dream?
>>STAVISH: Wow,
that's a tough one.
I think I will go with
out-of-body experience.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>STAVISH: I think.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>STAVISH: Well,
because at that point,
not only are we having the same
capacity of the lucid dream,
but also there is
an expanded capacity
in terms of the
ability to, we'll
say, using the term
loosely, visit other places
or dimensions that
aren't necessarily
always apparent to us in
the lucid dream state.
>>NOORY: How in control
are you with a lucid dream?
>>STAVISH: Myself?
>>NOORY: Mm-hmm.
>>STAVISH: When I have
them, and I have them
several times a month,
it's usually very good.
The control is good.
It's solid.
I know I'm dreaming.
I'm able to do a few things.
I'm able to direct or change
the direction of the dream.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STAVISH: But often, at that
point, when you get used to it,
I don't do it anymore.
I just let the dream unfold,
knowing that it's a dream.
Because remember, I
said a lucid dream
is coming from another
aspect of my being,
so the goal is to just
relax, and let it unfold,
and see what it has.
What am I teaching myself?
That's what I want to know.
We try to manipulate
so much across the day,
maybe sometimes, it's good to
know I can manipulate this,
but I don't need to.
>>NOORY: So sometimes, you
could be in a lucid dream,
but not get involved.
You just simply still watch.
>>STAVISH: Of course.
And naturally, the best
thing, because I say,
oh, I know this is a dream--
>>NOORY: I'll step
in when I have to.
>>STAVISH: And I know
this is important.
That's often what goes on in
my own mind, quite frankly.
I know this is a dream, and
I know this is important,
so pay attention.
>>NOORY: Why do we even
dream in the first place?
>>STAVISH: Again, I think that
modern scientists have really
demonstrated quite
well to us that it's
a way of just
processing information.
Our mind is complex, and we
absorb a tremendous amount
of data across the
day, tremendous amount
of experiences.
And our subconscious is
processing this information out
for us, based upon our
notions and value systems.
>>NOORY: Now you said
you'd prefer to do an OBE--
out-of-body experience.
What exactly is that then?
>>STAVISH: That is when you have
an experience, and you say, OK,
it has the same qualities
as a lucid dream,
meaning there's lucidity,
but you're not in some--
rarely are you in some
kind of, we'll say,
fantasy land or a dreamscape.
>>NOORY: It's reality.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, you're standing
in the room of your bedroom,
or you're standing in the
hallway of your house.
>>NOORY: The operating room,
if you're having surgery.
>>STAVISH: Exactly.
Operating.
You know that you are,
in some kind of way,
no longer in your physical
body, and yet, you
are experiencing either
the physical world,
or maybe some would say it's
astral reflection, somehow,
but you are experiencing
something that is definitely
connected to terra
firma and the reality
of your day-to-day
awakening life.
And often, it will
involve, maybe, sometimes,
you are visiting people.
We've heard of
these experiences.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STAVISH: We have
many great saints,
like Padre Pio,
bilocation, known
to appear in several
places at the same time.
We see in the religious
literature, different saints
or people appearing to
others, and giving teachings,
and then disappearing.
>>NOORY: Well, we've
had other people,
sometimes, say, hey, I
saw you last night here.
You were never there.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: Either
it's a doppelganger,
or maybe it was your OBE,
and you materialized somehow.
>>STAVISH: And that's really
a funny part is it may happen,
and we're not even aware of it.
>>NOORY: We don't know that.
>>STAVISH: Right.
>>NOORY: They do, but we don't.
>>STAVISH: Because for whatever
reason, they perceive it.
>>NOORY: And we seem to
communicate with them too.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: That's weird.
>>STAVISH: Well, this
is the part about it.
We are so complex, just
in and of ourselves.
And that's why it
said, "know thyself."
Over the Temple of
Apollo Delphi in Ancient
Greece was inscribed the
injunction, "know thyself."
We are so complex that there's
stuff going on inside of us
right now that we
are not aware of,
and that the more
awareness we bring to it,
and pay attention to it,
and relax, the greater
fulfillment we have.
And at the same time, that just
reaches beyond us and touches
other people too.
And it can be in very practical
ways, just like you said.
Someone says, George, I saw you.
You were talking to me.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
You were at the ballgame
right next to me.
>>STAVISH: Yeah,
You say, no, I wasn't.
I was at home.
I was passed out on the couch.
It was a long day at
work, and I'm done.
>>NOORY: The ability to
perform in an OBE or lucid
dreaming, is it connected
to the physical body,
or is it outside of that?
>>STAVISH: That's a tough one.
I would say, from
my own experiences,
and the people I've spoken
to, and what literature
exists on it traditionally,
that it is intimately connected
to what is outside of it.
That is, the physical body is
relaxed, in most instances,
is completely relaxed,
immobile, asleep,
or in deep, deep,
deep relaxation,
and the individual's
mind and whatever
other energetic
capacities the mind
carries with it, whether we talk
about psychic centers and all
these things, is now
off doing what it does.
However, there are
instances, and there
are suggested
techniques that I have
seen, in which people
are able to engage
in that same
out-of-body experience
while physically moving.
That is, they can create
a movement or ritual,
if you will, that then somehow
is perceivable at a distance.
>>NOORY: Why do
you prefer the OBE?
>>STAVISH: I think it's
because, again, it's the greater
freedom that it bestows.
Just as a lucid dream
bestows greater freedom on us
than a day-to-day
dream, in many ways,
even greater freedom than
day-to-day life, right?
Because we could do
things in a lucid
dream that we can't
do in physical life.
We can grow wings and fly.
We can swim under the sea.
>>NOORY: If you want to.
>>STAVISH: Right.
If you want to.
Swim under the sea.
Do all sorts of great stuff.
The OOB, or the beginning of
the out-of-body, and then we
can even move that into what
we call astral projection.
We'll say out-of-body really
is connected to experiences
in this realm, whereas we
think of astral projection now
has to do with more
complex and subtle levels
of psychic awareness.
But just like this world,
they're a consensual reality,
I think is the term that's used.
Other entities, other beings,
other consciousness is there.
So that's what we would think
of as different heavens,
or the Buddha realms,
or Dharma realms.
>>NOORY: What is it
that fascinates you
about all of this work?
>>STAVISH: Just because
it's part of who we are,
and what is our nature,
who are we as individuals,
and what is the
purpose for our life.
The people who I've met and look
up to across my life-- and I
continue to look up to people.
That hasn't stopped.
I always look to say,
what is this person?
What great skill do they have?
What have they accomplished?
How can I--
>>NOORY: How did
they accomplish it?
>>STAVISH: How they
accomplished it,
and that means how
I can too, it's
always about
discovering our limits
and then overcoming them.
>>NOORY: Don't you think
pure greatness has occurred
in the dream state--
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>NOORY: --where people
have changed their lives
and whatever they've
had to do that way?
>>STAVISH: You meet
people again and again.
It's not always when they're
awake, but often in a dream,
there'll be that breakthrough.
You know what?
I'm going to go
open that business.
I'm going to write that book.
I'm going to create
that invention.
I'm going to go
take on that career.
>>NOORY: And it came
to me in a dream.
>>STAVISH: And it
came to me in a dream.
And when we hear
the word "dream,"
we think of our, what we
call, day-to-day dreams,
our common dreams, what
Buddhists call karmic dreams,
just the stuff jutting
around in our heads.
This isn't like that.
This is that profound awakening,
like Christian Rosenkreutz who
has the angel come to him
and says, hey, come on.
We're going somewhere.
Pay attention here.
>>NOORY: Do you think
little babies dream?
>>STAVISH: Oh, I'm sure they do.
I just wouldn't
know enough to speak
about it in any form of manner.
>>NOORY: That would be
a fascinating study.
I don't know how
you get your answer.
>>STAVISH: I guess
you'd have to do
a lot of neurological
connectivity
and do scans on them.
>>NOORY: One day,
I think science
will catch up and be able to
put electrodes on your brain.
You go to sleep, and
we'll see your dream
as it's a video on a screen.
Wouldn't that be amazing?
>>STAVISH: That would
be very interesting.
>>NOORY: It's
conceivable, isn't it?
>>STAVISH: I think
that's the beauty of it.
Whatever we conceive
of, somehow, we've
been able to achieve.
And technology, particularly
our understanding
of the mind and the
brain, is advancing
more so now than it ever had.
So we're getting greater
and greater understanding
of that mind-body connection,
but also mind-brain connection.
>>NOORY: What is
the body of light?
>>STAVISH: The body of light is
probably the most fascinating
thing that we have.
Because we have that
continuum from meditation
to dreaming to lucid dreaming,
OOB, astral projection.
The body of light is a actual
vehicle of consciousness
that you see
recorded and reported
in different
esoteric traditions.
So you said how you
have a lucid dream,
but you don't see yourself.
Here, it's an actual
sense of self.
It's an actual
vehicle, if you will,
or body of energy that
allows you to consciously act
in these spiritual dimensions.
>>NOORY: We have a Gaia
series, Mark, called,
"Arcanum," which
investigated the history
of the body of light.
>>CLARE HENRY: Mystics
believe that Adam and Eve were
originally beings of light.
>>WILLIAM HENRY:
Rabbinical tradition also
says that Adam and Eve were
covered with a cloud of glory,
meaning they glowed
rainbow rays.
>>CLARE HENRY: Adam's
garment is identical
to the celestial
robes of the righteous
in the Jewish and Christian
mystery tradition.
>>WILLIAM HENRY: It is described
as a shining garment or garment
of light.
>>CLARE HENRY: It was of
extraordinary brilliance
and splendor, and because of
it, Adam and Eve possessed
supernatural qualities.
>>WILLIAM HENRY: This glowing,
rainbow body was taken away
from humanity, mystics say,
and our goal is to reclaim it.
>>CLARE HENRY: In
the Dead Sea Scrolls,
the Essenes proclaim
the faithful were
to receive life everlasting,
and a crown of glory,
and a robe of honor
amid light perpetual.
>>WILLIAM HENRY: Is
it possible that Adam
and Eve's glorious
and glowing garment
is the original body of
light within all of us?
>>CLARE HENRY: In William's
feature investigation,
we will explore the mystical
teaching that tells us
that we are all in the process
of morphing into a higher form.
In one lifetime,
we can transform
or morph into what they call
the rainbow body of light.
>>NOORY: Mark, do you agree
everyone has a body of light?
>>STAVISH: Yes,
for the most part.
There's always subtle
differences in interpretation,
but that notion that
they've put forth
are in accordance
with most traditions.
>>NOORY: Jesus always
was depicted in pictures
of having light around him.
Would he be considered one
of these bodies of light?
>>STAVISH: Yes, because
of the transformation
which took place.
And remember, within
Judaism and Christianity,
coming from
Babylonian captivity,
you hear the phrase "thought,
word, and deed," and the idea
that our thoughts, our words,
and our actions or our body,
need to be harmonious
or integrated.
And you see that
process mentioned even
in NLP, [INAUDIBLE]
in terms of congruity.
Within Tibetan
Buddhism, where they
talk about the rainbow body,
you have body, speech, and mind.
It's the same process, the
idea that these aspects of us,
our energetic aspects,
when harmonized,
create an ability to
overcome what we would think
of as normal
limitations, so that we
have the ability, simply
put, mind-body connection.
>>NOORY: I'm going to start
practicing lucid dreaming.
That's what I want to do.
>>STAVISH: Well, that's it.
Because then there's
greater congruity here,
greater harmony taking place.
The mind, we say,
takes on the ability
through concentration
and meditation,
not only to have the out-of-body
experience, but through it,
to create, through its
own mental processes,
an astral body or form,
which, of course, is light,
it's not matter
as we think of it.
And hence, that body of light
is what is used in these.
What they're referring to,
it is a mental construct
that each individual creates.
That needs to be
clearly understood.
And you see within
Tibetan Buddhism,
in the Dzogchen tradition,
the formation of this rainbow
body, as they called it,
this transformational process
is a large part of it.
But it also can
happen spontaneously
there, or naturally, I
should say, naturally there,
through decades and
decades of practice.
>>NOORY: Mark, what is
your website, for folks
who want to track you?
>>STAVISH: It is
hermeticinstitute.org.
>>NOORY: Simple as that.
>>STAVISH: That's it.
>>NOORY: Thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>STAVISH: Thank you very
much for having me here.
>>NOORY: Lucid
dreaming-- I can't wait
to continue to practice it.
Who knows what will happen?
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for being on "Beyond Belief."